docs: unplugin-typegpu guide (#1191)
software-mansion/TypeGPU: apps/typegpu-docs/src/content/docs/tooling/unplugin-typegpu.mdx

---
title: Build Plugin
description: A guide on how to use the optional build plugin for TypeGPU
---

> [unplugin-typegpu](https://www.npmjs.com/package/unplugin-typegpu) is a tool for TypeGPU applications,
> which automatically transforms the code during build time,
> unlocking some new features, optimizations and quality-of-life perks for the developers.
> While using the plugin is not required in majority of scenarios, it is highly recommended when writing GPU programs using TypeGPU.

Reviewer: Let me know what you think about this change. I think it's a bit more straightforward and terse.
```suggestion
[unplugin-typegpu](https://www.npmjs.com/package/unplugin-typegpu) is an optional (but highly recommended) tool for projects using TypeGPU. It hooks into your bundler of choice, and unlocks new features, optimizations and quality-of-life improvements.
```

> Currently the package includes the following functionalities, with potentially more coming in the future:

Reviewer: Anything can be extended in the future 🫡
```suggestion
The package includes the following functionalities:
```

- **TGSL functions**

>   TypeGPU allows running a subset of JavaScript functions on the GPU. It is achieved by transpiling the JS code into WGSL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  TypeGPU allows running a subset of JavaScript (which we call TGSL) on the GPU. It is achieved by transpiling JS functions into WGSL.
```

  };

  const add = tgpu['~unstable'].fn({ a: d.u32, b: d.u32 }, d.u32)(addImpl);
  ```

  After transpiling the function, the JS implementation is removed from the bundle in order to save space.
  To be able to invoke the function both on GPU and CPU, it needs to be marked with `"kernel & js"` directive;

  ```ts
  const add = tgpu['~unstable'].fn(
    { a: d.u32, b: d.u32 },
    d.u32,
  )(({ a, b }) => {
    'kernel & js';
    return a + b;
  });

  add(2, 2);
  ```

  Besides transpiling JS into AST, the plugin also collects external references, so it is not necessary to pass them to the `$uses` method anymore.
  This is not possible when using a JIT transpiler.

- **[WIP] Automatic naming of tgpu objects**
  Naming gpu objects via the `$name` method is very helpful for debugging. Soon it will not be necessary to do that explicitly.
  Instead the plugin will be able to name the objects based on the variable names that they are assigned to.

:::caution
In order for the plugin to work, the file that is to be transformed needs to import _typegpu_.
Note that unused imports may be automatically removed by bundlers, so make sure this does not happen.
:::

## Installation

> ```bash
> npm install --save-dev unplugin-typegpu
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Tabs syncKey="package-manager">
  <TabItem label="npm" icon="seti:npm">
    ```sh frame=none
    npm install --save-dev unplugin-typegpu
    ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="pnpm" icon="pnpm">
    ```sh frame=none
    pnpm add -D unplugin-typegpu
    ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="yarn" icon="seti:yarn">
    ```sh frame=none
    yarn add -D unplugin-typegpu
    ```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>
```
